Sensitive Data Handling (#100)
open-telemetry/oteps: text/0100-sensitive-data-handling.md

#  Sensitive Data Handling

> By default, OpenTelemetry libraries never capture potentially-sensitive data.

Reviewer: This would mean that not even URLs can be captured.

Author: It's a fair point - how does "... never capture potentially-sensitive data, except for the full URL" sound?

> By default, OpenTelemetry libraries never capture potentially-sensitive data, except for the full URL.

Reviewer 2: That's a pretty bold statement. Are we sure we will be able to ensure this 100%?

Author: It's a design goal.  Bugs are probably inevitable 😄

Reviewer 3: I think armin was asking if this is a design goal we want. The term `libraries` could mean anything from API to SDK to Instrumentation Libraries. I think the strongest statement we could make would be:
```suggestion
By default, instrumentation libraries provided by OpenTelemetry make a best effort to never capture potentially-sensitive data, except in cases like the full URL where the data is necessary to the observability of the system.
```

> By default, OpenTelemetry libraries never capture potentially-sensitive data, except for the full URL.

Reviewer 2: What are "OpenTelemetry libraries"? Are these the API + SDK implementations or instrumentations/integrations that are provided by the OpenTelemetry project?

Author: This would include any current and future auto-instrumenter (like Java, .NET, node.js) as well as any manually wrapped libraries(e.g., in a contrib package).

Reviewer 2: I see. It would make sense to explicitly mention the scope to which this OTEP and its design goals apply to in the document.

## Motivation

Many businesses are under regulatory or contractual constraints on how they process sensitive data (e.g., GDPR, 
PCI, HIPPA).  If we are "safe by default" and manage this issue well, it will help greatly with 
OpenTelemetry adoption in many markets.

## Explanation

> By default, our java auto-instrumentation library does not capture your app's credit card numbers, taxpayer IDs, 

Reviewer 2: Is the Java auto-instrumentation mentioned as an example or does this only apply to the Java auto-instrumentation? Please clarify.
If this is about all kinds of instrumentations, do you intend to redact all set attributes by default?

Author: Sticking with the sql example, it would also apply to the node.js instrumentation in opentelemetry-js, including the opentelemetry-plugin-mysql and opentelemetry-plugin-postgres packages.  It doesn't look like the nascent .NET auto agent would be affected (yet).
No, this wouldn't apply a single rule to all set attributes.  We assume manual instrumentation knows what it is doing.  Since we are writing the instrumentation for auto-instrumenters, we are aware of the semantics of the attribute values and can apply appropriate rules (e.g., we know that the numbers in `http.status_code` are not risks, but that a database connection string might contain a password.

personal medical data, users' passwords, etc.  Unless you put them in the URL.  If you have put them in the URL, we provide a way to fix that.

How do we do that?  For example, we don't know the semantics of the SQL your app sends to its database(s).  Some of the data might be 
sensitive, and some of it might not.  What we do is remove all 
*potentially* sensitive values.  This means that sql like `SELECT * FROM USERS WHERE ID=123456789` gets turned into
`SELECT * FROM USERS WHERE ID=?` when it gets put into our `db.statement` attribute.  Since our library doesn't know anything about the 

> meaning of `ID` values, we decided to be "safe by default" and drop all numeric and string values entirely from all SQL.  So what gets 

Reviewer 2: Does this work for all sorts of SQL dialects out there?

Author: Yes, a sql lexer can easily broadly apply to many vendors' dialects, because it's only interested in tokenization and not in syntax/grammar.

Reviewer 4: > This means that sql like `SELECT * FROM USERS WHERE ID=123456789` gets turned into
`SELECT * FROM USERS WHERE ID=?` when it gets put into our `db.statement` attribute.

I don't see how this can possibly be done efficiently inside the language SDKs, as opposed to scrubbing this in the ingestion pipeline.

Reviewer 5: Only seeing this otep now as it was linked to from another newer otep -- I'd like to see something like this added so going over this one now.

I don't think this is a good example since the db statement should already be parameterized, like an extended query in postgres. Are there many databases that don't support a form of query + args like found in SQL databases?

So for db instrumentation we should document to the user that they should not manually construct queries with dynamic data in general but most importantly for the case of instrumentation, to not do it with sensitive data.

And instead the query parameter attributes need to be either not included at all or have the ability to be filtered by key.

This would require no SQL parsing library and be doable in all of the implementations.

Of course best practices aren't always an option so having the SQL parsing that can scrub all predicates in the collector would be a must have for some.

I also think this relates to span processors and how they need updating to provide functionality like this. I planned for that to be a follow up that builds on my OTEP https://github.com/open-telemetry/oteps/pull/186 but since it has not been met with a positive reception so far I may have to rethink that :)

This OTEP is about a "broad agreement" and I agree with that but put the rest here because I think the broad agreement should include span transformations in the export pipeline that doesn't yet exist, and that one of those transformations should be a required configurable attribute scrubber.

captured in our system is just table names, field names, clause structures, etc. (metadata about your data's structure and how you access it).

Yes, this also has the pleasant side effect of reducing the cardinality of these dimensions, making it easier to build metrics or indices on them. 
If you want to reduce it further, our collector has features for that.  Again, our design goal is to protect you from 
liability or exposure due to captured sensitive data.

We use similar techniques for all other protocols/query/command mechanisms.  One exception is how we treat URLs.  We will by
default capture the full URL (including the query and fragment) in `http.url`.  Note that this will not include
the contents of form submissions or XHR posts.  Since many products/features log the entire URL already 
(like in Apache's access log), developers already need to consider this.  If you are putting sensitive data in the URL,
we offer configuration options to work around this.

If your app doesn't process any sensitive data at all and you want to see the raw sql values, you can configure that.  The documentation

> will have some bold/red warnings telling you to be sure you know what you're doing.

Reviewer 2: Is this something to be configured in the UI of a backend or at the place where the instrumentation is set up? Are these bold red warnings supposed to show up in a log produced by the instrumentation or in the tracing backend's UI?

Author: Config would remain local to each library (a manual wrapper might provide a dictionary of options as an API parameter, an auto agent might use an environment variable or config file).  The warning would appear in the documentation of this config knob.

already been some discussions about having span (and attribute) processing logic run in-process but off-thread in the application (i.e., by a configurable span 
processing pipeline, which would use separate threads for its work).  For sql normalization (my first/example concern), I don't believe this is necessary, but 
further work on this issue may put pressure here.

One drawback of this "safe by default" approach is that it puts a configuration burden on some users who are not handling sensitive data but
want to have as much visibility as possible into their system.  Staying with the sql normalization example however, the vast majority of sql in the world doesn't 
have different performance characteristics based on the exact values passed in, but on the number of them, or the complexity of the `WHERE` clauses, 
the number of values in an `IN` list, presence of an index on fields, etc.

Some might consider doing most of this work at the collector, rather than in-process with the app.  For users who are already exposed to this 

> issue, I don't think the statement "yes, by default we scrub the credit card number immediately after it is sent over the wire to our collector" is a very reassuring one.

Reviewer 6: I'm skeptical about the performance impact on the host application, somewhat, but I'm even less convinced that we're going to build out scrubbers for PII in every client language. 

This seems to suggest a configuration where an OTel collector is co-located in the side-car configuration, so that it resides in the same security domain. Then the statement is "yes, by default we scrub the credit card number immediately after it crosses outside your process a locally running sidecar."

Reviewer 4: +1. Making the promise that scrubbing will be done in-process in every language is a very large scope creep. Doing it once in a sidecar or central tier is much more sustainable and manageable.
